[FLINK-22537][docs] Add documentation how to interact with DataStream API (#15837)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/dev/table/data_stream_api.md

---
title: "DataStream API Integration"
weight: 3
type: docs
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# DataStream API Integration

{{< hint info >}}
Tthis page only discusses the integration with DataStream API in JVM languages such as Java or Scala.
For Python, see the [Python API]({{< ref "docs/dev/python/overview" >}}) area.
{{< /hint >}}

> Both Table & SQL API and DataStream API are equality important when it comes to defining a data

Author: I would like to emphasize that Table & SQL is one API. I will replace it with a `/`

structures of the table runtime (i.e. `RowData`) that partially work on binary data need to be converted
to more user-friendly data structures (i.e. `Row`). Usually, this overhead can be neglected but is
mentioned here for completeness.
{{< /hint >}}

{{< top >}}

Converting between DataStream and Table
---------------------------------------

Flink provides a specialized `StreamTableEnvironment` in Java and Scala for integrating with the
DataStream API. Those environments extend the regular `TableEnvironment` with additional methods
and take the `StreamExecutionEnvironment` used in the DataStream API as a parameter.

{{< hint warning >}}
Currently, the `StreamTableEnvironment` does not support batch execution mode. Use the regular `TableEnvironment`
for this. Nevertheless, both bounded and unbounded streams can also be processed using streaming
execution mode.
{{< /hint >}}

The following code shows an example of how to go back and forth between the two APIs. Column names
and types of the `Table` are automatically derived from the `TypeInformation` of the `DataStream`.
Since the DataStream API does not support changelog processing natively, the code assumes

> append-only/insert-only semantics during the stream-to-table and table-to-stream conversion.

Author: Yes it will fail. I added an example exception and more explanation.

import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.CheckpointingMode
import org.apache.flink.table.api.bridge.scala._

// create Scala DataStream API

val env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment

// set various configuration early

env.setMaxParallelism(256)

env.getConfig.addDefaultKryoSerializer(classOf[MyCustomType], classOf[CustomKryoSerializer])

env.getCheckpointConfig.setCheckpointingMode(CheckpointingMode.EXACTLY_ONCE)

// then switch to Scala Table API

val tableEnv = StreamTableEnvironment.create(env)

// set configuration early

tableEnv.getConfig.setLocalTimeZone(ZoneId.of("Europe/Berlin"))

// start defining your pipelines in both APIs...
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Execution Behavior

Both APIs provide methods to execute pipelines. In other words: if requested, they compile a job
graph that will be submitted to the cluster and triggered for execution. Results will be streamed to
the declared sinks.

Usually, both APIs mark such behavior with the term `execute` in method names. However, the execution
behavior is slightly different between Table API and DataStream API.

**DataStream API**

> The DataStream API's `StreamExecutionEnvironment` acts as kind of a _builder pattern_ that can construct

Author: we are not targeting SQL developers here but DataStream API users

a complex pipeline. The pipeline possibly splits into multiple branches that might or might not end with
a sink.

At least one sink must be defined otherwise the following exception is thrown:
```
java.lang.IllegalStateException: No operators defined in streaming topology. Cannot execute.
```

`StreamExecutionEnvironment.execute()` submits the entire constructed pipeline and clears the builder
afterwards. In other words: no sources and sinks are declared anymore and a new pipeline can be

> appended. Thus, every DataStream program usually ends with a call to `StreamExecutionEnvironment.execute()`.

Author: I added `appended to the builder`. I find this "builder-like" concept important to understand for the user.

> appended. Thus, every DataStream program usually ends with a call to `StreamExecutionEnvironment.execute()`.

Author: > I think you meant to say that no new pipeline can be appended, but it reads differently.
You can add further pipelines and submit them.

table.printSchema()
// prints:
// (
//  `event_time` TIMESTAMP_LTZ(3) *ROWTIME*,
//  `name` VARCHAR(200),
//  `score` INT
// )
// note: the watermark strategy is not shown due to the inserted column reordering projection
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Example 1 illustrates a simple use case when no time-based operations are needed.

Example 4 is the most common use case when time-based operations such as windows or interval
joins should be part of the pipeline. Example 2 is the most common use case when these time-based
operations should work in processing time.

Example 5 fully relies on the declaration of the user. This can be useful to replace generic types
from DataStream API (which would be `RAW` in Table API) with proper data types. Since `DataType` is
richer than `TypeInformation`, we can enable immutable POJOs and other complex data structures easily.
The following example in Java shows what is possible:

```java
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream;
import org.apache.flink.table.api.DataTypes;
import org.apache.flink.table.api.Schema;
import org.apache.flink.table.api.Table;

// DataStream API does not support immutable POJOs yet

> // they will result in a generic type that is a RAW type in Table API by default

Author: Actually, this is why the `TypeInformation` section is in this document. I will try to improve this part again.

// data structures to the desired structured type

// since `event_time` is a single rowtime attribute, it is inserted into the DataStream
// metadata and watermarks are propagated

val dataStream: DataStream[User] = tableEnv.toDataStream(table, User.class)

// data types can be extracted reflectively as above or explicitly defined

val dataStream: DataStream[User] =
    tableEnv.toDataStream(
        table,
        DataTypes.STRUCTURED(
            User.class,
            DataTypes.FIELD("name", DataTypes.STRING()),
            DataTypes.FIELD("score", DataTypes.INT()),
            DataTypes.FIELD("event_time", DataTypes.TIMESTAMP_LTZ(3))))
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Note that only non-updating tables are supported by `toDataStream`. Usually, time-based operations
such as windows, interval joins, or the `MATCH_RECOGNIZE` clause are a good fit for insert-only
pipelines next to simple operations like projections and filters. Pipelines with operations that
produce updates can use `toChangelogStream`.

{{< top >}}

Handling of Changelog Streams
-----------------------------

Internally, Flink's table runtime is a changelog processor. The concepts page describes how

> [dynamic tables and streams are related]({{< ref "docs/dev/table/concepts/dynamic_tables" >}})
> with each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[dynamic tables and streams relate]({{< ref "docs/dev/table/concepts/dynamic_tables" >}})
to each other.
```

A `StreamTableEnvironment` offers the following methods to expose these _change data capture_ (CDC) functionalities:

- `fromChangelogStream(DataStream)`: Interprets a stream of changelog entries as a table. The stream

> record type must be `org.apache.flink.types.Row` as the `RowKind` flag that is contained in
> every record is evaluated during runtime. Event-time and watermarks are not propagated by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
record type must be `org.apache.flink.types.Row` since its `RowKind` flag is evaluated at runtime. Event-time and watermarks are not propagated by default.
```

This method expects a changelog containing all kinds of changes (enumerated in `RowKind`) as the
default `ChangelogMode`.

- `fromChangelogStream(DataStream, Schema)`: Allows to define a schema for the `DataStream` similar
to `fromDataStream(DataStream, Schema)`. Otherwise the semantics are equal to `fromChangelogStream(DataStream)`.

- `fromChangelogStream(DataStream, Schema, ChangelogMode)`: Gives full control about how to interpret a
stream as a changelog. The passed `ChangelogMode` helps the planner to distinguish between _insert-only_,
_upsert_, or _retract_ behavior.

- `toChangelogStream(Table)`: Reverse operation of `fromChangelogStream(DataStream)`. It produces a
stream with instances of `org.apache.flink.types.Row` and sets the `RowKind` flag for every record

> during runtime. All kinds of updating tables are supported by this method. If the input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at runtime. All kinds of updating tables are supported by this method. If the input
```

table contains a single rowtime column, it will be propagated into a stream record's timestamp. Watermarks
will be propagated as well.

- `toChangelogStream(Table, Schema)`: Reverse operation of `fromChangelogStream(DataStream, Schema)`.
The method can enrich the produced column data types. The planner might insert implicit casts if necessary.
It is possible to write out the rowtime as a metadata column.

- `toChangelogStream(Table, Schema, ChangelogMode)`: Gives full control about how to convert a table
to a changelog stream. The passed `ChangelogMode` helps the planner to distinguish between _insert-only_,
_upsert_, or _retract_ behavior.

From a Table API's perspective, converting from and to DataStream API is similar to reading from or
writing to a virtual table connector that has been defined using a [`CREATE TABLE` DDL]({{< ref "docs/dev/table/sql/create" >}}#create-table)
in SQL.

> Because `fromChangelogStream` behaves similar to `fromDataStream`, we recommend to read
> the [previous section](#handling-of-insert-only-streams) before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `fromChangelogStream` behaves similar to `fromDataStream`, we recommend reading
the [previous section](#handling-of-insert-only-streams) before continuing here.
```

> This virtual connector also supports to read and write the `rowtime` metadata key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This virtual connector also supports reading and writing the `rowtime` metadata key.
```

number of update messages by 50%.

### Examples for `toChangelogStream`

The following code shows how to use `toChangelogStream` for different scenarios.

{{< tabs "fc4cd538-4345-49ee-b86e-b308f002e069" >}}
{{< tab "Java" >}}
```java
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.datastream.DataStream;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.ProcessFunction;
import org.apache.flink.table.api.DataTypes;
import org.apache.flink.table.api.Schema;
import org.apache.flink.table.api.Table;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.StringData;
import org.apache.flink.types.Row;
import org.apache.flink.util.Collector;
import static org.apache.flink.table.api.Expressions.*;

// create Table with event-time
tableEnv.executeSql(
    "CREATE TABLE GeneratedTable "
    + "("
    + "  name STRING,"
    + "  score INT,"
    + "  event_time TIMESTAMP_LTZ(3),"
    + "  WATERMARK FOR event_time AS event_time - INTERVAL '10' SECOND"
    + ")"
    + "WITH ('connector'='datagen')");

Table table = tableEnv.from("GeneratedTable");

// === EXAMPLE 1 ===

// convert to DataStream in the simplest and most general way possible (no event-time)

Table simpleTable = tableEnv

>     .fromValues(row("Alice", 12), row("Alice", 2), row("Bob", 12))

Reviewer: I noticed that `fromValues` actually doesn't necessarily create a source stream with the order as specified, so you have to be careful in the examples with that. For a `sum` as here, it doesn't matter though.
I don't think there's a better Table API alternative for starting an example though, except for maybe a "SELECT" statement with the values which doesn't seem to fit that well...

Author: A `SELECT` statement with values behaves the same. We still need a `fromElements` or `fromCollection` in Table API that keeps the order and allows any data type. Also rows with kinds can not be inserted yet.

    .as("name", "score")
    .groupBy($("name"))
    .select($("name"), $("score").sum());

tableEnv
    .toChangelogStream(simpleTable)
    .executeAndCollect()
    .forEachRemaining(System.out::println);

// prints:
// +I[Bob, 12]
// +I[Alice, 12]
// -U[Alice, 12]
// +U[Alice, 14]

// === EXAMPLE 2 ===

// convert to DataStream in the simplest and most general way possible (with event-time)

DataStream<Row> dataStream = tableEnv.toChangelogStream(table);

// since `event_time` is a single time attribute in the schema, it is set as the
// stream record's timestamp by default, however, at the same time it remains part of the row

dataStream.process(
    new ProcessFunction<Row, Void>() {
        @Override
        public void processElement(Row row, Context ctx, Collector<Void> out) {

             // prints: [name, score, event_time]
             System.out.println(row.getFieldNames(true));

             // timestamp exists twice
             assert ctx.timestamp() == row.<Instant>getFieldAs("event_time").toEpochMilli();
        }

>     });

Reviewer: without execution, nothing would run
```suggestion
    });
env.execute();
```

// === EXAMPLE 3 ===

// convert to DataStream but write out the time attribute as a metadata column which means
// it is not part of the physical schema anymore

DataStream<Row> dataStream = tableEnv.toChangelogStream(
    table,
    Schema.newBuilder()
        .column("name", "STRING")
        .column("score", "INT")
        .columnByMetadata("rowtime", "TIMESTAMP_LTZ(3)")
        .build());

// the stream record's timestamp is defined by the metadata, it is not part of the row

dataStream.process(
    new ProcessFunction<Row, Void>() {
        @Override
        public void processElement(Row row, Context ctx, Collector<Void> out) {

            // prints: [name, score]
            System.out.println(row.getFieldNames(true));

            // timestamp exists once
            System.out.println(ctx.timestamp());
        }

>     });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    });
env.execute();
```

// === EXAMPLE 4 ===

> // for advanced users, it is also possible to use more internal data structures for efficiency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// for advanced users, it is also possible to use more internal data structures for better efficiency
```

Reviewer: How about also linking to the "Data Types" docs page?

val simpleTable = tableEnv
    .fromValues(row("Alice", 12), row("Alice", 2), row("Bob", 12))
    .as("name", "score")
    .groupBy($"name")
    .select($"name", $"score".sum())

tableEnv
    .toChangelogStream(simpleTable)
    .executeAndCollect()
    .foreach(println)

// prints:
// +I[Bob, 12]
// +I[Alice, 12]
// -U[Alice, 12]
// +U[Alice, 14]

// === EXAMPLE 2 ===

// convert to DataStream in the simplest and most general way possible (with event-time)

val dataStream: DataStream[Row] = tableEnv.toChangelogStream(table)

// since `event_time` is a single time attribute in the schema, it is set as the
// stream record's timestamp by default, however, at the same time it remains part of the row

dataStream.process(new ProcessFunction[Row, Unit] {
    override def processElement(
        row: Row,
        ctx: ProcessFunction[Row, Unit]#Context,
        out: Collector[Unit]): Unit = {

        // prints: [name, score, event_time]
        println(row.getFieldNames(true))

        // timestamp exists twice
        assert(ctx.timestamp() == row.getFieldAs[Instant]("event_time").toEpochMilli)
    }

> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
})
env.execute
```

// === EXAMPLE 3 ===

// convert to DataStream but write out the time attribute as a metadata column which means
// it is not part of the physical schema anymore

val dataStream: DataStream[Row] = tableEnv.toChangelogStream(
    table,
    Schema.newBuilder()
        .column("name", "STRING")
        .column("score", "INT")
        .columnByMetadata("rowtime", "TIMESTAMP_LTZ(3)")
        .build())

// the stream record's timestamp is defined by the metadata, it is not part of the row

dataStream.process(new ProcessFunction[Row, Unit] {
    override def processElement(
        row: Row,
        ctx: ProcessFunction[Row, Unit]#Context,
        out: Collector[Unit]): Unit = {

        // prints: [name, score]
        println(row.getFieldNames(true))

        // timestamp exists once
        println(ctx.timestamp())
    }

> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
})
env.execute
```

// === EXAMPLE 4 ===

// for advanced users, it is also possible to use more internal data structures for efficiency

// note that this is only mentioned here for completeness because using internal data structures
// adds complexity and additional type handling

// however, converting a TIMESTAMP_LTZ column to `Long` or STRING to `byte[]` might be convenient,
// also structured types can be represented as `Row` if needed

val dataStream: DataStream[Row] = tableEnv.toChangelogStream(
    table,
    Schema.newBuilder()
        .column(
            "name",
            DataTypes.STRING().bridgedTo(classOf[StringData]))
        .column(
            "score",
            DataTypes.INT())
        .column(
            "event_time",
            DataTypes.TIMESTAMP_LTZ(3).bridgedTo(class[Long]))
        .build())

// leads to a stream of Row(name: StringData, score: Integer, event_time: Long)
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> The bevavior of `toChangelogStream(Table).executeAndCollect()` is equal to calling `Table.execute().collect()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The behavior of `toChangelogStream(Table).executeAndCollect()` is equal to calling `Table.execute().collect()`.
```

However, `toChangelogStream(Table)` might be more useful for tests because it allows to access the produced
watermarks in a subsequent `ProcessFunction` in DataStream API.

{{< top >}}

Mapping between TypeInformation and DataType
--------------------------------------------

The DataStream API uses instances of `org.apache.flink.api.common.typeinfo.TypeInformation` to describe
the record type that travels in the stream. In particular, it defines how to serialize and deserialize

> records from one DataStream operator to the other. It also helps in serializing state into savepoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
records from one DataStream operator to the other. It also helps in serializing state into savepoints
```

- The order of `PojoTypeInfo` fields is determined during the conversion by looking for a constructor
that orders all fields with its parameters. Otherwise the field order will be alphabetical.

- `GenericTypeInfo` and other `TypeInformation` that cannot be represented as one of the listed
`org.apache.flink.table.api.DataTypes` will be treated as a black-box `RAW` type. The current session
configuration is used to materialize the serializer of the raw type. Composite nested fields will not
be accessible then.

- See {{< gh_link file="flink-table/flink-table-common/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/table/types/utils/TypeInfoDataTypeConverter.java" name="TypeInfoDataTypeConverter" >}} for the full translation logic.

Use `DataTypes.of(TypeInformation)` to call the above logic in custom schema declaration or in UDFs.

### DataType to TypeInformation

The table runtime will make sure to properly serialize the output records to the first operator of the
DataStream API.

{{< hint warning >}}
Afterwards, the type information semantics of the DataStream API need to be considered.
{{< /hint >}}

{{< top >}}

Legacy Conversion
-----------------

{{< hint info >}}

> The following section describes outdated parts of the API that will be removed in future versions.

Reviewer: If this is outdated and the methods are declared `@Deprecated`, I would vote for actually removing this section for the sake of concise documentation that doesn't confuse users. If this is only relevant to previous Flink versions, it could live in their branches' docs, but shouldn't be carried on.

Author: Unfortunately, the methods are not marked as `@Deprecated` yet. Due to time constraints, this feature made it last minute and is fully usable with 1.13.1. I would suggest to keep the docs around for at least another release.

Reviewer: We clarified offline: unfortunately, these APIs are not deprecated yet and the new ones are still experimental, so we'll have to keep this section in for now.

        DataTypes.FIELD("name", DataTypes.STRING()),
        DataTypes.FIELD("age", DataTypes.INT()),
    row("john", 35),
    row("sarah", 32));

// Convert the Table into an append DataStream of Row by specifying the class
val dsRow: DataStream[Row] = tableEnv.toAppendStream[Row](table)

// Convert the Table into an append DataStream of (String, Integer) with TypeInformation
val dsTuple: DataStream[(String, Int)] dsTuple = 
  tableEnv.toAppendStream[(String, Int)](table)

// Convert the Table into a retract DataStream of Row.
// A retract stream of type X is a DataStream<Tuple2<Boolean, X>>. 
// The boolean field indicates the type of the change. 
// True is INSERT, false is DELETE.
val retractStream: DataStream[(Boolean, Row)] = tableEnv.toRetractStream[Row](table)
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

**Note:** A detailed discussion about dynamic tables and their properties is given in the [Dynamic Tables](streaming/dynamic_tables.html) document. 

{{< hint warning >}}
Once the Table is converted to a DataStream, please use the `StreamExecutionEnvironment.execute()` method to execute the DataStream program.
{{< /hint >}}

{{< top >}}

### Mapping of Data Types to Table Schema

> Flink's DataStream API support many diverse types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flink's DataStream API supports many diverse types.
```
